This is I/O stuff:

A random note - processes can communicate by pipes.
              - The cpu timer is just a circuit you can think of like other mcu

Input is the data we send to the computer system, 
while output is the data that is processed and comes from the system

OS -> controller -> device
Each device is associated with a specific IRQ signal.

I/O units have a mechanical and electronic component

I/O devices are either block or character devices.
Block: stores info in fixed size blocks. e.g. Hard Disk, USB, Blu-Ray Disk. 
e.g. tapes contain a sequence of blocks, these are read as they spin around.
Rewinding to Nth block is the same as a disk doing a seek.
Character: delivers or accepts a stream of characters. No seek operation, not
addressable. Printers, network interface, mouse are character devices.

Devices also can create hardware interrupts to communciate the device needs attention
from the operating system.

Drivers:
A device driver is a piece of software that enables communication 
between an operating system or application and hardware or peripheral devices

Device Controllers:
The electronic component of the device. On personal computers 
it takes the form as a chip. Can handle many devices. The actual device itself could
be the circuit for the keys of a keyboard maybe. The controller raises interrupts.

Memory Mapped I/O
Controller has a few registers to connect with cpu, stored in main memory.
These registers have state, commands running and can be modified.
The device can map their registers into main memory
The OS can write to these registers to command the device via the controller.
Devices have a data buffer the OS can write to.

Port
Each register is assigned an I/O port number. The set contains the I/O
port space. This is not part of main memory.

Hardware interrupts:
From the device for example.

software interrupts:
Fro the cpu upon executing an instruction, e.g. a syscall.
Or interacting with a device driver to read some input. The kernel
will catch and handle these interrupts. 

With I/O interrupts, they are ussually to say to a device driver that they 
can now read the key for example.
